How does javascript actually work.
Imagine getting this question during an entry or how about this.
Explain the difference between asynchronous and synchronous and Javascript.
Or maybe they ask you to explain the statement.
Javascript as a single threaded language that can be non-blocking.
Oh boy in this video we're going to help you answer those questions.
This is a video you may need to visit a few times as you progress to really get it.
So don't feel discouraged if you don't feel 100 percent confident.
Just keep watching it and you'll get it.
Now we don't need to know how javascript works internally to write a program.
But it is important to learn.
I see a lot of people who have been developers for years and none know this.
It's like being a pilot and not knowing how an airplane can fly.
OK that's a little bit dramatic there.
But you get my point.
So let's start first what is a program.
Well a program has to do some simple things.
It has to allocate memory.
Otherwise we would be able to have variables or even have a file on our computer.
It also has to parse and execute scripts which means read and run commands.
OK.
Now we also know that from our previous discussion there's the javascript engine that each browser implements
in Chrome it's the V8 and the V8 engine reads the javascript that we write in changes into machine executable
instructions for the browser.
Now the engine consists of two parts a memory heap and a call stack.
Now the memory heap.
This is where the memory allocation happens.
And don't worry we're going to talk about this.
And then the call stack.
This is where your code is read and execute it.
It tells you where you are in the program.
So let's simplify this and show you what I mean.
I have Sublime Text over here.
And for us to allocate memory and the memory heap Well it's as simple as doing Konst a Eco's to one
we've just allocate a memory now when we assign this the javascript engine is going to remember that
OIA A has a value of 1.
We've just used up the memory heap and I can keep going on on and on like this right.
I can keep copying and pasting and changing these variables to B and C and I can change the values to
a hundred and maybe here will be 10.
Cool.
Now what's an issue that we see with this.
This is something called a memory leak that you're going to hear as you become a developer.
And what we've done here is we've created all these variables these global variables that are in the
memory heap but you see this box right.
And with all memory we have a limited amount that we can actually have.
So by increasing the number of variables that we have Imagine if I had just this page full of variables
and instead of just numbers they're like very very big arrays.
Well memory leaks happen when you have unused memory such as let's say we're now using the variable
a but it's go bear well by having unused memory just laying around it fills up this memory heap.
And that's why you might hear why global variables are bad.
Global variables are bad because we don't forget to clean up after ourselves.
We fill up this memory heap and eventually the browser will not be able to work.
All right so that's memory.
Let's talk about the call stack.
What is that.
Well again with a call stack we can have something like this console log Mogo 1 console log to name
finally console log 3.
If I ran this code in my browser terminal.
Well I get one two three the call stack if you remember that's what it reads and executes our scripts.
So what the call stack does it reads the first line console dialog.
It gets put in this call stack.
So the javascript engine says console dialog has been added.
Let's pop it onto this call stack and then it runs it and creates one then it says OK I'm removing the
first console lock as I just finished running it I'm going to place the second console log into my call
stack adds it on here and says Yep.
Execute two.
And then it removes that it pops it and then gets Konsole lock 3 and logs Konst lock 3.
And then finally removes it but let's have a bit more of a complex example here to demonstrate this
point.
Imagine I have something like this.
I have a function concept one
and inside this function we have another function conc to and for now it's not really going to do much
is going to console dot log for and in here we'll just say we Rhondda to function.
So if I copy and paste this and place it into our console and I run one I get four and ignore this error
here.
It just related to my app in the browser.
But you see that we get four.
So what happened here according to the call stack.
Well if we have the call stack here we first ran the one function.
So on top of the call stack the one function gets run.
And as we enter into this call stack we see that we run another function to.
So two goes on top of the call stack and now we run the two function which is Konsole the log.
So we have console Dom log for that's run inside of the two function.
So now that we've read this the call stack is going say OK.
There's nothing else inside of this.
I'm going to run Konsole lock 4 so it's going to print out number four here.
It's going to remove that from the call stack and then remove the two and then remove the one because
it's just been called
and the call stack is now empty.
All right.
Awesome.
Now let's revisit the statement from the beginning of the video.
Javascript is a single threaded language that can be nonblocking single threaded means that it has only
one call stack.
And one call stack only you can only do one thing at a time.
And as we saw a call stack is first in last out.
So whatever's at the top the call stack gets run first then below that below that below that the call
stack is empty.
Now other languages can have multiple calls.
And these are called multi-thread.
You can also see how that might be beneficial to have multiple call stack so that we don't keep waiting
around for stuff.
Why was javascript designed to be single threaded.
While running code on a single thread can be quite easy since you don't have to deal with complicated
scenarios that arise in multithreaded environment.
You just have one thing to worry about.
And when I say issues with multi-threaded environment can have such thing as deadlocks now.
Guess what you just learned what synchronous programming means synchronous programming simply means.
Line one gets executed then Line 2 gets executed and then Line 3 gets executed.
The latter can start before the first finishes.
So this console lock 2 doesn't start until Konsole lock finishes and cancelled 3 doesn't start until
the about to finish because well we've looked at the call stack because of the call stack.
Now you may have heard of the site stack overflow.
If you're a developer you use it on a daily and.
Have you ever wondered what Stack Overflow means.
Will Stack Overflow.
Is this when a stack is overflowing.
Kind of like we talked about memory leaks and how the memory heap of a javascript engine can overflow
well with stack overflow.
This happens when the call stack just gets bigger and bigger and bigger until it just doesn't have enough
space anymore.
How can we do that.
Can we recreate a stack overflow.
Yes I can show you quickly that to create a stack overflow.
All you have to do is function foo like we have in here and this function will just have foop hand.
We're just going to run our food function right.
That looks confusing what is happening here.
This something called recursion
and recursion means a function that calls itself.
So if you look at what this function does we run foo and foo gets executed.
What foo does is well we run foo again.
So it just keeps looping over and over and over having recursion.
But there is no end in sight right.
We keep adding foo to the call stack.
We keep adding it over and over and over and over and over and over and over and over and we have a
stack overflow.
So if you want to have fun go to your browser go into your console and run something like this and see
what happens.
You're gonna get a stack overflow.
All right.
So hopefully this now makes sense.
The javascript engine which is the V-8 engine Ancrum has a memory chip and a call stack.
Now javascript is single threaded only one statement is executed at a time but there is a problem now
isn't it.
What if y2 was a big big task we needed to do.
Maybe loop through an array that had millions of Aietes but would happen there.
Well we would have this console log execute then the second line then it is a massive massive job we'll
just work there and cancel like 3.
We'll take a really long time to get lost and in our small example that doesn't mean much but if he
had this on a Web site well the user wouldn't be able to do anything.
The website would pretty much freeze until that task is done and the user just waits there.
That's not very good is it.
Well with synchronous task if we have one function that takes up a lot of time it's going to hold up
the line.
Imagine a buffet restaurant right.
If all the people want but Bobbie says Hold on guys have to keep eating and putting bacon on my plate.
Well everybody has to wait in line.
So sounds like we need something nonblocking remember our first statement that we made in this video
javascript as a single threaded language that can be nonblocking.
Ideally we don't wait around for things that take time.
So how do we do this all asynchronous to the rescue.
Think of asynchronous like a behavior synchronous execution is great because it is predictable.
We know what happens first then what happens next.
What happens there.
But it can get slow.
So when we have to do things like image processing or making requests over the network like API calls
and don't worry we're going to talk about this in future videos.
We need something more than just synchronous tasks right.
So you're thinking to yourself.
Andre How do we do asynchronous programming.
Well let me remove some of this clutter.
We can do asynchronous programming by doing something like this said time out which we're going to talk
about is a function that comes within our browsers and it allows us to create a time at and we can just
give it the first parameter is the function that we want to run.
And then the second parameter is how many seconds we want to wait.
So let's say I want to wait two seconds.
So 200 2000 milli seconds.
If I do this now let's run in to the console and see what happens.
Well what just have it.
We have cons..
One.
Then cancel like three and then cancel log to two seconds later.
It looks like we just skipped this whole step and then put this at the very end.
Well you've just woodenness asynchronous programming in order to understand this and what just happened.
I need to take you to the next part and that is in order for javascript as we know it to run for the
javascript engine with memory heap and call stack to run.
We need more than just the javascript engine we need what we call a javascript runtime environment and
Javascript runtime environment is again part of the browser its included in the browsers.
They have extra things on top of the engine.
They have something called the web API Lets call back Q And an event loop.
And as you can see here said Time-Out is part of the web API.
Its not technically part of javascript is it.
Its what but the browsers give us to use.
So we can do asynchronous program.
OK.
So looking at this diagram.
See if we can figure out what our code was doing.
We can create here our own call stack will have a web API and then we'll have a callback queue and then
loop just like we have in our javascript runtime environment.
So what's happening here.
Well first we have console log that goes into the call stack.
And that gets run.
So we log console log to the browser.
We then get set timeout.
Into our call stack because we finished this first task we're going to the second one.
And what's said timeout what's going to happen is well in the call stack is going to say OK I have set
time.
And because said time out is not part of Joe's script but part of the web API it has this special characteristic.
What's going to happen is it triggers the web API.
And says hey set timeout has just been called and because we notified away big guy we can pop it out
of the call stack.
Now the web API starts a timer here a timer of two seconds.
It's going to know that in two seconds you have to do something.
And because the call stack is empty the javascript engine now goes to console log 3 and executes this.
So that makes sense right now we've done one and three but we still have said timeout.
Two seconds in the web API.
Now after two seconds when our time limit is up the web API is going to say okay set time out should
be run.
Let's see what's inside of it.
Well we have a console lock too.
So what's going to happen is it's going to say hey set time is done.
We have a callback and this callback of said time out we added to the call back to saying that hey we
have to run something we're ready to run it now the last part the events that the event loop over here
checks and says hey is the call stack empty and it keeps checking all the time.
If the stack is empty and if the call stack is empty and there's nothing running right now the javascript
engine it's going to say hey do we have any callbacks.
It's going to check the code back to you and say is anything in there because the call stack is empty.
We can throw something in there and make it do some work.
In our case we say oh yeah I do.
Let me put this into the concept.
So now we move the code back into the call stack and then the back we are it and by running it we see
that we have a console log too.
So it's going say cancel or log to it's going to run this function and once it's done it's going to
pop it out of the call stack.
And again we're down with the callback so we remove it and there you go.
We're done.
Everything is empty and we've just run this one three.
It's going to go through the entire web API callback queue event Lou and then it's going to run console
log to true.
That was a lot of information.
So you might need to watch that a few times but hopefully that makes sense to you of why we noticed
this behavior.
And I want to challenge your understanding here.
Knowing what you know and what I just tell you what happens if I changes to zero.
That means zero seconds.
I'm going to give you a second to think about what will happen.
And then we're going to try this out.
When I clear the console copy and paste this and run it well one three and two.
Did you guess right.
Now think about why that happened.
Even though this is zero seconds it still went through the process.
It still got entered into the web API and then the callback queue and then they ended.
And by the time that was happening the call stack had already moved on to the console walk three and
only after console log 3 was done and the call stack was empty the event loop said oh yeah we can call
cancel log to hopefully that makes sense for you.
And if you're able to understand that you'll actually have a lot of people that hire for javascript
roles ask questions like this on an interview and you have to explain why that is.
So I hope that made sense to you and you can use that to your advantage at the next interview.
So let's recap.
If you wanted to load your latest tweets onto a web page and you do this synchronously then visitors
to your site won't be able to do anything until those tweets are loaded.
This could cause a long delay before they even get to see the content of his site.
They may not be able to click anywhere and the page will feel like it's frozen.
Not a very good user experiences.
Another way to think about this is calling your teacher with a question.
Synchronous way is you called the teacher.
You wait on the phone until the teacher answers the phone and ask him the question and hopefully get
an answer.
So you let the phone ring until he picks up.
But you're not doing anything else in the meantime.
Asynchronous means that you send a text to a teacher with a question.
And then when the teacher or she has the time or will respond to you and call you with the answer so
you can do other stuff in between javascript is asynchronous when you can leave it a message and a Colback
tells you Hey Mr. teacher has a message for you when you're not too busy.
And that's why we call it a callback function and a callback cube we're calling back to let them know
that hey there's some stuff waiting for you.
Now we see over here that we have Dohm Ajax timeout and there's a few other things.
But you also see in the Colback you have enclave on load on done.
Do you remember the event listeners well with an event listener.
We had something like an element and we added the event listener.
And in this in nerve could say listen for a click and you will have a function that perhaps just console
log click will similar to an asynchronous way of programming.
We've created this click function and now we're just listening to it.
And every time a click happens on the web page.
So on the Dom Well we run the callback function which console logs click right.
So to finish things up when is asynchronous happening it happens a lot when you try and talk between
machines like speaking to a database making network requests image processing reading files and don't
worry we'll go through this impeach videos.
But to recap what we just learned Javascript is a single threaded language that can be nonblocking it
has one call stack and it does one thing at a time in order to not block the single thread.
It can be asynchronous with callback functions and these Colmar actions gets run in the background through
the callback queue and then the amended to bring it back to the call stack.
So next time you get asked what is the difference between a synchronous or synchronous burger.
Or how does javascript work.
You should have a little bit more confidence to answer that question.
And I hope that this was helpful.
I see in the next video.